# camera
This is a photo camera software - it calculates exposure (aperture and shutter speed) based on input data. <br>
<br>
[ Quick start if you don't want to read the whole explanation: "UserInterface.java" produces a JavaFX GUI, and "Test.java" is for running the program without a GUI ]<br>
<br>
<br>
The program gets the following data as input:
- the most important one is light intensity. In real life camera gets it from it's lightmeter. Lightmeter's output is an electric current, which is presented here as a number. This number should be a whole number from 1 to approx. 1 bln, with standard daylight being in the area of 1 mln - 5 mln.
- info about max and min apertures of the lens that is connected to the camera body. Simply speaking, aperture is a hole in a lens through which light enters the camera, and this hole can change in size. Of course, the bigger the hole, the more light can enter the camera within given time. Number-wise, the smaller the aperture's number, the bigger the hole, so the max possible aperture is 2.8, and the min possible aperture is 32. Another thing to know about aperture is that the smaler the hole (and higher the number), the bigger depth-of-field is (depth-of-field describes distance behind and in front of the point, on which the lens is carrently focussed, where objects are still acceptably sharp).
- focal length of the lens in mm. It is used to calculate longest feasable shutter speed (a time, for which the shutter is open and light reaches the film or CCD). There is a rule of thumb that ( if a camera is handheld ) for a 50 mm lens longest time should be 1/50 of a second, for a 100 mm lens longest time should be 1/100 of a second, and so on. If shutter speed used is longer than this rule says, usually picture will be ruined because of camera shake. 
- film speed, that is, a sensitivity of film or CCD to light. The higher film speed's number, the more sensitive film or CCD is, and the less light is needed to produce a correctly exposed picture. <br><br>

<br>
In addition, there are 3 options for camera usage - handheld, on a monopod and on a tripod. <br>For handheld, longest shutter speed is calculated according to the mentioned rule of thumb, and rounded towards shorter existing setting, so it the rule says 1/50 of a second, 1/60 of a second is selected as 1/50 setting does not exist (shutter speeds cannot be adjusted smoothly). <br>For a monopod, longest shutter speed is calculated as 4 times longer than this rule says, for example:  100 mm lens -> the handheld rule says 1/100 of a second -> on a monopod it will be 4 times longer, ie 1/25 of a second. In reality it is rounded to 1/30 of a second as 1/25 setting doesn't exist.<br>For a tripod, this rule is ignored as the camera is supposed to be completely stable, so shutter speed may be as long as 30 seconds (the longest that this camera can provide). <br><br>
<br>
Before we continue to other program's features, some extra explanation is required.<br><br>
It has already been mentioned that aperture (that hole in the lens) can change, and the smaller the aperture number, the bigger the hole (and vice versa). Usually aperture scale has following settings: 2.8 - 4 - 5.6 - 8 - 11 - 16 - 22 - 32, and jumping from one setting to the next lets in twice as much (or as little) light. There is a special professional word for those settings - f-stops, and it is used like this: Let's say we are at setting 5.6. If we close the lens down two f-stops, we get to setting 11 (5.6 -> 8 -> 11), and if we open the lens up two stops, we get to setting 2.8 (5.6 -> 4 -> 2.8). <br>
When talking about f-stops, there is another rule of thumb in photography: usually the lens is at it's best optical quality when it is closed two f-stops down from it's maximum aperture, so if a particular lens's max aperture is 2.8, it's best quality is at 5.6 (2.8 -> 4 -> 5.6); if the max is 4, the best is 8. <br><br>
<br>
Getting back to program's other features: you can choose between 4 different subject modes: full program, landscape, action and portrait. <br>
<br>
Full program mode: Here the program tries to use that best aperture that was discussed above (ie closing the lens 2 f-stops down them the most open one). If (considering given light intelsity, film speed and range of feasable shutter speeds) it is possible to achieve proper exposure, then this f-stop is selected. If it is not possible, then the program tries apertures that are smaller than the best one, till it reaches the end. If none is possible, then it tries the two apertures that are bigger than the best one. If no combination of available f-stops and feasable shutter speeds can provide proper exposure (ie it is generally too dark or too bright), the program selects one of the extreme setting (largest aperture + longest feasable shutter speed or smallest aperture + shortest shutter speed) and activates over- or underexposure warning.<br>
<br>
Portrait mode tries to close the lens down just one f-stop and not two, in order to give a shallower depth-of-field that is preferred for portraits. If it doesn't work, it tries the two closest ones (one down, one up) and then starts with the rest of apertures, going towards the most closed one.<br>
<br>
Lanscape mode tries to close the lens way down, so that when photographing a landscape, depth-of-field is as large as possible so that both background and foreground are kept sharp. The best aperture in this mode is the smallest one minus one f-stop (so if the lens's min aperture is 22, the best is 16) as at the smallest one optical quality tends to deteriorate. Also, in this mode the program shows a hyperfocal distance for selected conbination of aperture and lens's focal length (when you focus a lens on hyperfocal distance, all objects from infinity to half of that distance are acceptably sharp).<br>
<br>
Action mode differs from the other three. Here the purpose is to keep shutter speed short, so that fast-moving object is not "smeared" in the picture. In this mode the longest feasable shutter speed is 4 times shorter than normal (so if for a given focal length the longest shutter speed normally should be 1/125 of a second, here it set to 1/500 of a second). The rest works the same as full-program mode, with the exception of when the camera is used on monopod or tripod.<br>
Normally, with monopod and tripod usage we allow longer shutter speeds as camera shake is reduced / eliminated. However, in action mode our problem is not camera shake, but a fast-moving subject, so we don't want our shutter speed get longer, thus we disregard monopod and tripod usages.
